Connecticut’s Lightweight and Affordable Electronic Case Reporting (eCR) Power BI Report
Suzanne Speers, MPH, Michael Schneider, MPH and Ms. Nancy L Barrett, MS, MPH, Connecticut Department of Public Health
BACKGROUND: The Connecticut Department of Public Health (CTDPH) needed a Power BI report to allow eCR informatics staff to easily view trends with electronic case reporting (eCR) messages, identify sender issues, and assess authored Reportable Condition Knowledge Management System (RCKMS) condition criteria. There was also a need to compare data from the Association of Public Health Laboratories Public Health Agency eCR Monitoring Dashboard (PHA eCR MD), to identify eCRs not pulled by CTDPH eCR message processing infrastructure. Developing the Power BI report provided informatics staff with needed skills in data linking and data modeling.
METHODS: eCR data were scraped from reportability responses (RRs) using PowerShell and extensible stylesheet transformations, then combined using Microsoft (MS) Power Query. Data from the PHA eCR MD was extracted and transformed from JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) to MS Excel files using R. Power BI desktop was used to visualize and model the data. Data from different sources were linked using the eCR document number. Dimension tables for disease, dates, senders, and other information were developed to add information to the model and allow for better slicing of data.

RESULTS: This process was used to collect data from all production eCRs received since May 2024 (56,220 eCRs) to create a Power BI report. The report allowed staff to view the RCKMS condition criteria met by individual eCRs and adjust the rules in RCKMS to fine tune case ascertainment. Visualization of the RCKMS timeboxing impact showed a 50-90% reduction in extraneous eCRs. PHA eCR MD data was incorporated and compared to eCRs processed by CTDPH, which led to the discovery of 11 unprocessed production eCRs that needed to be reprocessed. In total, >500 encounter code issues were identified, staff followed up with the responsible organizations.

CONCLUSIONS: Connecticut informatics staff were able to quickly stand up a Power BI eCR monitoring report to view trends, assess authoring and other criteria. The data model in Power BI desktop allowed comparison of eCRs from the PHA eCR MD to eCRs received by CTDPH to ensure all messages were received and processed by the CTDPH eCR infrastructure. The method was affordable, lightweight, easily customizable and does not depend on database access, which might be ideal when a quick solution to explore eCR data is needed.
