A Peak behind the Curtain: Using Current Reportable Conditions Trigger Codes to Reverse Analyze Ecr Triggering in Electronic Health Record Systems—Connecticut, 2024

Michael Schneider, MPH, Suzanne Speers, MPH and Ms. Nancy L Barrett, MS, MPH, Connecticut Department of Public Health

BACKGROUND: Triggering of electronic initial case reports (eICRs) relies on the healthcare organization (HCO) importing current Reportable Condition Trigger Codes (RCTC) used to initiate the eICR. Accurate case ascertainment is important as Connecticut moves HCOs to reporting all conditions in 2025. A study was undertaken to assess how to validate that triggering was correct and if all codes that should be triggered for an eICR were being used.

METHODS: Current RCTC spreadsheets from the electronic reporting and surveillance distribution (eRSD) website were obtained and the codes extracted into an extensible markup language (XML) document. An extensible stylesheet language transformation (XSLT) document and PowerShell was used to extract codes from the eICR that matched RCTC codes and flag those codes that triggered the eICR. Microsoft (MS) Power Query was used to bring results into one MS Excel document for further analysis. These analyses allowed us to further parse eICRs against the sending HCOs.

RESULTS: A 15-day sample of 3,938 eICRs from all conditions were analyzed and found they were from 21 HCO senders. Of these, 3,632 (92.2%) eICRs were from an HCO that used the current RCTC version (16 senders) while the remaining 5 HCOs used an out-of-date version. Of the 16 HCOs using the current version, 9 HCO senders appeared to not support multiple triggers per eICR. HCO senders not supporting multiple triggers sent on average 4.38 eICRs per encounter; those that had multiple triggers averaged 1.41 eICRs per encounter. One sender appeared to be triggering eICRs on five codes that were not contained in the RCTC, resulting in 47 extra eICRs that had to be processed and assessed.

CONCLUSIONS: This method allowed staff to determine if HCOs were using the full set of current codes and using multiple triggers per eICR. This information helped confirm that triggering for priority disease eICRs is occurring based on the current RCTC. HCOs that optimize the use of the current RCTC could reduce the processing burden for both HCO senders and public health partners.
